automatic troubleshooting endpoint context docs (#728)
elastic/endpoint-package: package/endpoint/docs/knowledge_base/high_cpu/windows_high_cpu.md

Use `elastic-endpoint top` on the affected host to identify which processes and internal processing stages (MLWR, BHVR, RULES, etc.) consume the most CPU. Query `metrics-endpoint.metrics-*` for `Endpoint.metrics.system_impact` to identify the top processes by `overall.week_ms` remotely.

## Common issues

### Third-party security product conflicts

When another security product (Silverfort, Symantec/Broadcom, N-Able AV Defender, CrowdStrike) runs alongside Elastic Defend, each product intercepts the other's file and process activity, creating a scanning feedback loop. This commonly manifests as sustained 100% CPU with both products' processes at the top of task manager.

> Silverfort is a particularly acute case on Domain Controllers because its `SilverfortServer.exe` generates over 10,000 TCP connections per minute via WinDivert, each producing a network event that Elastic Defend must process. Combined with Malicious Behavior Protection requiring network event enrichment for, this can saturate CPU and eventually cause blue screens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Silverfort is a particularly acute case on Domain Controllers because its `SilverfortServer.exe` generates over 10,000 TCP connections per minute via WinDivert, each producing a network event that Elastic Defend must process. Combined with Malicious Behavior Protection requiring network event enrichment, this can saturate CPU and eventually cause blue screens.
```

> Silverfort is a particularly acute case on Domain Controllers because its `SilverfortServer.exe` generates over 10,000 TCP connections per minute via WinDivert, each producing a network event that Elastic Defend must process. Combined with Malicious Behavior Protection requiring network event enrichment for the rules engine, this can saturate CPU and eventually cause blue screens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Silverfort is a particularly acute case on Domain Controllers because its `SilverfortServer.exe` generates over 10,000 TCP connections per minute via WinDivert, each producing a network event that Elastic Defend must process. Combined with Malicious Behavior Protection requiring network event enrichment for, this can saturate CPU and eventually cause blue screens.
```

Add all 3rd party security applications as **Trusted Applications** in Elastic Defend to break feedback loops. Also add Elastic Defend's paths to the third-party product's exclusion list.
To confirm the problem on Endpoint side check `elastic-endpoint top` for the third-party product's processes. If they dominate `overall.week_ms` in the metrics.

For Silverfort specifically, if Trusted Applications are not sufficient due to sheer network event volume, set `windows.advanced.kernel.network` to `false` in the policy's advanced settings to stop network event generation at the kernel level. This disables host isolation capability.

### High security event volume (logon/logoff events)

> On hosts with heavy authentication activity (print servers, file servers, Domain Controllers), Windows Security event log entries 4624 (Logon) and 4634 (Logoff) can generate tens of events per second. When Malicious Behavior Protection is enabled, Elastic Defend collects and processes Security events regardless of whether Security event collection is enabled in the policy, because the behavioral rules engine needs this data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On hosts with heavy authentication activity (print servers, file servers, Domain Controllers), Windows Security event log entries 4624 (Logon) and 4634 (Logoff) can generate tens of events per second. When Malicious Behavior Protection is enabled, Elastic Defend collects and processes Security events regardless of whether Security event collection is enabled in the policy, because the malicious behavior rules need this data.
```

> A host generating 60+ logon/logoff events per second will see sustained high CPU from the rules engine processing pipeline. Query `metrics-endpoint.metrics-*` and check `Endpoint.metrics.system_impact` — if `authentication_events` dominates, this is the cause.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A host generating 60+ logon/logoff events per second will see sustained high CPU from the event or Malicious Behavior processing pipelines. Query `metrics-endpoint.metrics-*` and check `Endpoint.metrics.system_impact` — if `authentication_events` dominates, this is the cause.
```

---
type: automatic_troubleshooting
sub_type: high_cpu
os: [Windows]
date: '2026-03-09'
---

## Symptom

Elastic Defend's `elastic-endpoint.exe` process consumes sustained high CPU on Windows hosts, causing system slowdown, application unresponsiveness, or login delays. CPU may spike during specific activities (application launches, user logons, Office updates) or build gradually over hours until the system becomes unusable.

## Summary

> Elastic Defend performs real-time file hashing, digital signature verification, memory scanning, behavioral rule evaluation, and event enrichment. Each protection layer adds processing overhead, and the cumulative effect depends on the workload profile of the host. The most common drivers of high CPU on Windows are third-party security product conflicts creating mutual scanning loops, high-volume security events (logon/logoff) overwhelming the rules engine, file-intensive operations triggering repeated hashing of large binaries, and VDI/Citrix environments where the file metadata cache is empty on every session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Elastic Defend performs real-time file hashing, digital signature verification, memory scanning, behavioral rule evaluation, and event enrichment. Each protection layer adds processing overhead, and the cumulative effect depends on the workload profile of the host. The most common drivers of high CPU on Windows are third-party security product conflicts creating mutual scanning loops, high-volume security events (logon/logoff) overwhelming the Malicious Behavior engine, file-intensive operations triggering repeated hashing of large binaries, and VDI/Citrix environments where the file metadata cache is empty on every session.
```

Use `elastic-endpoint top` on the affected host to identify which processes and internal processing stages (MLWR, BHVR, RULES, etc.) consume the most CPU. Query `metrics-endpoint.metrics-*` for `Endpoint.metrics.system_impact` to identify the top processes by `overall.week_ms` remotely.

## Common issues

### Third-party security product conflicts

When another security product (Silverfort, Symantec/Broadcom, N-Able AV Defender, CrowdStrike) runs alongside Elastic Defend, each product intercepts the other's file and process activity, creating a scanning feedback loop. This commonly manifests as sustained 100% CPU with both products' processes at the top of task manager.

Silverfort is a particularly acute case on Domain Controllers because its `SilverfortServer.exe` generates over 10,000 TCP connections per minute via WinDivert, each producing a network event that Elastic Defend must process. Combined with Malicious Behavior Protection requiring network event enrichment for the rules engine, this can saturate CPU and eventually cause blue screens.

> To confirm, check `elastic-endpoint top` for the third-party product's processes. If they dominate `overall.week_ms` in the metrics, add them as **Trusted Applications** in Elastic Defend. Also add Elastic Defend's paths to the third-party product's exclusion list.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add all 3rd party security applications as **Trusted Applications** in Elastic Defend to break feedback loops. Also add Elastic Defend's paths to the third-party product's exclusion list.
To confirm the problem on Endpoint side check `elastic-endpoint top` for the third-party product's processes. If they dominate `overall.week_ms` in the metrics. 
```

Remediations:
- On 9.2.0+, use the advanced policy setting `windows.advanced.events.security.event_disabled` to exclude event IDs 4624 and 4634 specifically.
- On older versions, add `C:\Windows\System32\lsass.exe` as a Trusted Application to drop logoff events (attributed to lsass). This reduces visibility into lsass file and registry activity.
- Disabling Malicious Behavior Protection stops Security event collection entirely but removes behavioral detection capability.
- Removing "Security" from the Event Collection settings in the policy does not help while Malicious Behavior Protection is enabled, since behavioral rules require these events.

### File-intensive operations and large binary hashing

Elastic Defend hashes and verifies digital signatures of executables and DLLs when they are loaded. Large binaries like `msedge.dll` (195 MB) can take 10–15 seconds per hash operation. On hosts running browsers, Office applications, or developer tools that load many large DLLs, this creates sustained CPU spikes.

> The endpoint maintains a file metadata cache to avoid re-hashing known files. On versions prior to 8.0.1, the cache size (`FILE_OBJECT_CACHE_SIZE`) was limited to 500 entries, leading to frequent cache evictions and redundant hashing. Upgrading to 8.0.1+ significantly improves caching behavior.

Reviewer: pre 8.0.1 is so old it is no longer supported.

```suggestion
```

> For immediate relief on older versions, set `windows.advanced.kernel.asyncimageload` and `windows.advanced.kernel.syncimageload` to `false` in advanced policy settings. This reduces CPU by approximately 85% for DLL load processing at the cost of reduced visibility into library load events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
